---
title: Weirdest Interview So Far
date: 2016-03-06T16:38:25
tags: [self, egocentric, interview, embezzlement, storytime]
guid: "https://blog.afoolishmanifesto.com/posts/weirdest-interview-so-far"
---
This is a pretty good story and I want you all to hear it.  When I was
graduating from college I interviewed with three companies.  Two of them
([MTSI](http://mitsi.com/) and [Rockwell
Collins](http://www.rockwellcollins.com/)) offered me jobs.  The other one,
Empire Systems Inc., did not.

So Empire Systems Inc. was founded by a couple LeTourneau (my alma mater) alumni.
I didn't know the two of them myself, but we did overlap, by a year or two.
Anyway so back to the interviews.

They came to school for the career fair and gave their spiel, which changed a
couple times, but what I recall was something like the (non-existant at the
time) iPad, called the Marquess.  They needed EE's and programmers and whatnot.
It sounded kinda cool and I really wanted to work there, so I submitted my
(probably worthless) resume.  I got an interview; I suspect everyone who
submitted a resume did, but who knows.

## Interview I

So they invite me into some room; I think it was a class, but it could have been
some kind of break room.  The important thing to know is that it had a
projector.  We introduced ourselves, sat down, and get started.

The first question was likely something boring, like, "How would you handle
conflict on the job?"  I don't remember.  What I do remember is that the next
question was: "There was a dot moving around on the projector while you
answered; which quadrant was it primarily in?"

The rest of the interview went like that, where they'd ask a normal question,
and then some oddball thing.  The other oddball questions I remember were:

 * "We're going to show faces of famous people; identify them."
 * "Identify the following animals as predator or prey."

That last question, with the animals, was especially funny, because I watched
the first two (tiger and shark?) and said: "predator" and then didn't say
anymore, assuming that they all were.  I was wrong but didn't correct myself.

## Interview II

I remember waiting a long time to hear back.  I followed up a couple times
before getting the coveted on site interview.  But finally they raised the
capital they needed to hire more engineers. They had me, another peer, and some
others out.  I remember vividly that for some reason, presumably lack of
planning, they brought us via train instead of plane, even though it was not any
cheaper.  (As an aside, that train ride was when AJAX finally clicked for me,
and I think I leveled up as an engineer, I guess to level 1?)

I remember two things about that situation.  The first was that the interview,
again, was crazy.  It first featured a test.  No; not a quiz where you have to
implement sorting algorithms or whatever.  This quiz asked details about the
history of France and various parts of the Middle East.  It was huge too, like,
maybe twenty or thirty pages.  Then after that they did a group interview.  And
by that I mean: one interviewer to many interviewees.  So they'd ask a question
and we'd all have to vie for their attention or whatever.

I recall them asking something like, "if you could invent anything, what would
it be?"  I think that's a good question and it has made me think a lot ever
since.  Aside from that the whole thing was a joke.

The other thing I recall, with fondness, was their showing off of how it was a
lifestyle job.  They talked about doing karate before work and wearing ties
every day and all kinds of stupid stuff like that, but it didn't matter because
it was all vapor (keep reading.)  The good memory was that they had us over for
a game night with some of the people who worked at Empire and their spouses and
friends.  That was a lot of fun.  It felt really homey.

## Backstory and Embezzlement

One of my friends at MTSI actually did a project with the founder of Empire in
college.  The friend in question told me that said founder tended to be very
slippery when it came to his part of the project and had some bogus excuses
relating to his other classes.  Specifically he "charmed the profs with just
mountains of documentation and presentation skills."

Well, turns out he was slippery in real life too.  About a year after I joined
at MTSI someone sent [a link about how the founder effectively stole half a
million
bucks](http://www.pjstar.com/x1718695161/Man-pleads-guilty-to-money-laundering).
The whole thing sorta [reminds me of
this](http://www.collegehumor.com/video/6507690/hardly-working-start-up-guys).

I hope you enjoyed this little walk down memory lane; I know I did!
